# Why Foster Kenyan Independent Media?

Kenya's 'establishment media' is frequently cited as the strongest in the region, if not the continent. But this rosy view from abroad (and at home in some quarters) stands in sharp contrast to the lived experiences of journalists, editors, and citizens The recent elections revealed the many shortcomings of the major Kenyan media organizations,--the Standard, Nation, XXX-- who are weighed down by political and commercial interests, corruption, and an antagonistic state.  These deep-seated issues, a combination of political manipulation and media capitulation, have drastically weakened the fourth estate and have left Kenya without an independent, high-quality journalist organization consistently fulfilling the essential role of government watchdog.

Kenyans have an urgent need for those who support independent media and democratic governance to help courageous journalists overcome the systemic barriers they face in Kenya today--to foster a truly independent media, unencumbered with political baggage and capable of high-quality, in-depth, analytical reporting.

This collapse of the Kenyan media was on full display this past summer, in the lead-up to the August 8 presidential election. During the weeks that Reboot was conducting field research in Nairobi, headlines were naturally dominated by campaigns, politicians, and platforms. Yet instead of objective coverage and critical scrutiny, we found reporting that was largely superficial. Instead of rigorous analyses of policy, we saw gossip, scandals, and rumors, both in print and online. More ominously were the events and issues absent from the press, which only began to come out later, such as the alleged killing of a young girl at a XXX rally, which was not reported on in the press. Later, during the election itself, the [media failed to adequately monitor polling places, and journalists complained of police harassment.](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/global-opinions/wp/2017/08/11/kenyas-elections-show-how-the-media-has-sold-its-soul/?utm_term=.c49d1da7d5c6) Our research confirmed that this "snapshot" of the media during the elections was an accurate reflection of the field's status quo.

Despite the abundant evidence that Kenya's media is unable to provide the unbiased, rigorous journalism necessary for accountability, donors  have largely withdrawn their media support in recent years. Most frequently cited was Ford Foundation, a major independent media donor in Kenya, which ended funding as part of recent restructuring. (Funding for media has since started to return.) Research respondents frequently lamented the broad decline of funding, which has resulted in downsized programs, staff lay-offs, and the disappearance of capacity development initiatives. There are likely many reasons. As noted above, Ford's shift was reportedly related to leadership changes. Other respondents speculated it may have been due to perceptions of Kenya's media as strong and vibrant (and therefore not as much in need of support as other countries). Respondents also speculated that donors were wary about corruption; the fact that USAID recently suspended [$21 million](http://www.newsweek.com/kenya-health-ministry-corruption-us-foreign-aid-606624) in Ministry of Health funding due to corruption allegations gives weight to this belief. (Kenya's anti-corruption chief, in 2016, suggested that [$6 billion was going missing annually](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-kenya-corruption/third-of-kenyan-budget-lost-to-corruption-anti-graft-chief-idUSKCN0WC1H8) from the national budget.) Conversely, other donors, particularly those linked to foreign governments, have allegedly been wary about upsetting the Kenyatta administration, which has an adversarial relationship with organizations working on democracy and governance. The bottom line is that supporters of media and civil society have withdrawn at a critically dangerous time.

Since first taking power in 2013, the Kenyatta administration has antagonized the press and assaulted press freedom in intentional and strategic ways---pulling ad revenue, paying bribes, and physical threats and intimidation against journalists and editors. Kenyatta has displayed a similarly authoritarian attitude toward other pillars of accountability; when the Supreme Court mandated a rerun of the election in October. [Kenyatta criticized the judges' for not returning a ruling in his favor](http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/kenyan-president-uhuru-kenyatta-vows-fix-judiciary-supreme-court-election-annulment-a7925586.html), arguing the need to revisit problems with the Supreme Court if reelected.

[TK Paragraph with results of October election, TK. Kenyatta's victory is bad, etc...]

Regardless, a negative precedent has been set. Kenyatta has established a blueprint for state capture of a free press. (A restricted press is not foreign to Kenya. It is the decline in press freedom and independent since 2013 that has our respondents worried.)  And this blueprint has been especially successful because of longstanding and deeply intertwined economic and political weaknesses in the media: Shallow, low-quality reporting and self-censorship has become the norm, and corrupt practices are not rare; political ownership and influence of the media has eroded audience trust, who must rely on multiple sources for their information, including social media, which itself is vulnerable to manipulation

Kenya's "vibrant" media has failed to deliver the reporting that Kenyans need to make informed decisions. Much of the progress made in the name of press freedom [in recent decades](https://thereboot.github.io/onken/why-fund-kenyan-media/#understandingKenyanMedia) has already been lost, and more is at risk.

There is an urgent need to foster independent media and support courageous journalists ---through financial support, training, technical assistance, and strengthened domestic and international journalist and media networks. Support must go beyond traditional donor funding models with holistic, integrated, in-it-for-the-long-haul approaches. Securing a free, fair and credible media requires addressing, first and foremost, structural pressures that incentivize bias and self-censorship. Issues like government intimidation and political-biased media ownership subsume issues like capacity and quality of reporting, which are critical but must be considered within this larger context.

To support the media that Kenya deserves, donors must take a holistic and coordinated approach, and offer new types of commitments---moving from short-term, program-based support to long-term core funding. Implementers, trainers, and other providers of technical assistance, likewise, will need to shift their work accordingly, toward sustained engagement and creative solutions. This report offers a systems view of the current media ecosystem, in order to give advocates for indepedent media and democratic governance the information needed to take the necessary systems approach.\
Reboot's [theory of change](https://thereboot.github.io/onken/why-fund-kenyan-media/#theoryOfChange) is rooted in our research and work with media actors and citizens around the world. In this report, we apply our global theory of media accountability to the current Kenyan context. Our goal is to raise awareness about the urgent need for support in Kenya, as well as to help donors understand the systematic forces at play, so that future interventions can be strategic, holistic, and effective.

<!-- Include content as a variable -->
{% capture whatDoWeMeanMedia %}{% include /content/1.0.1_whatDoWeMeanMedia.md %}{% endcapture %}
<!-- markdownify the variable -->
{% capture whatDoWeMeanMedia %}{{ whatDoWeMeanMedia | markdownify }}{% endcapture %}
<!-- include the flyOut function and pass in the variable content -->
{% include flyOut.html type="First things first:" title="What do we mean by media?" id="whatDoWeMeanMedia" content=whatDoWeMeanMedia %}
