### Research opportunities in local media

Beyond the scope of this research, there is much more to examine outside of Nairobi. The 2010 constitution created a system of devolved government in Kenya, reallocating many of the country's resources to the county level. As a result, this also created new local centers of power and governance, and a need for stronger media, capable of covering local issues.

Given the importance of county governments in service delivery, future research might explore how these national challenges to media independence play out at the local level. For example, how are media covering local government in the context of devolution, where the 2010 constitution reallocated significant powers away from the national government? Respondents frequently commented on the struggles of media to adjust their business models as well as their journalists' abilities to adequately cover county governance issues.

What kind of business models can be applied to ensure local media have the resources they need? As one respondent with the Standard explained, "we cannot monetize the rural areas," raising questions about how the media can be incentivized to cover critical issues in vast swathes of the country, given the absence of clear revenue sources.

Another important question to examine is how relationships between government, media, and civil society differ at the local level. While respondents discussed limited cooperation between media and civil society at the national level, researchers also heard about cooperation between county level media and local civil society. For example, the Network of Catholic Radios works through the Catholic diocese, which has many local religious affiliates throughout communities. Because these partner organizations are deeply connected to the grassroots, media actors reported that these relationships can provide information, access, and, in some cases, allow them to cover politically sensitive issues.

Particularly in rural Kenya, local language radio, known as vernacular radio, has assumed an important information and communication role. They are typically owned by local politicians, faith-based organizations, or operate as franchises of established national media companies. Some questions to explore include: How does vernacular radio cover local and national governance issues? How do the forces that affect national media impact these local language media?

Finally, how has digital media impacted Kenyans living outside urban areas? While urban Kenyans are increasing turning to digital and social media for information, it is unclear how the digital divide is impacting rural Kenyans.

While this research touched on some of the above issues in relation to local media, the authors encourage further study to understand the scope and impact of local media in rural Kenya.
