## Theory of Change

Democracy and good governance depend on an independent media that is capable, experienced, and trusted. But the work of the media---shining lights, raising issues, and educating the public---does not automatically lead to good governance. It is up to citizens to pressure government and demand accountability; media is most successful when it understands, amplifies, and collaborates with citizens through its work, a dynamic described in [Reboot's previous landscape analysis of the media in West Africa](http://westafricamedia.reboot.org/).

That's why Reboot advocates a systems approach to media development. We see media as one constituent of the "accountability ecosystem," along with civil society, government actors, the justice system, and citizens themselves. The lines of influence and accountability between each of the constituents in a functioning ecosystem are shown in this diagram:

{% include figure.html src="/assets/img/on_graphic_theoryOfChange.jpg" alt="Theory of change" %}

As in any ecosystem, the strength and health of each constituent in the accountability ecosystem depends on the others. If the other institutions of accountability are weak---for example, if citizens do not trust voting results---then the government will be less responsive to public pressure, no matter how free and fair the press is. (Of course, the press in a lopsided system is much less likely to be free and fair).

Thus, strengthening the work of media for good governance requires working strategically within the accountability ecosystem. Media development work will naturally focus on media actors (and, of course, it would be unfeasible to build up every constituent of the accountability ecosystem simultaneously). But supporters and backers need to understand and coordinate media, civil society, citizens, and even government actors where possible. This is the only way to accurately evaluate opportunities for intervention.
