## Understanding Kenyan Media

- Background on the media - press freedom in the constitution, etc.
- Dig into establishment vs independent media

{% include graphic-timeline.html %}

#### The deep influence of tribalism

Tribe is a powerful divisive force in Kenya. It affects trust and relations.

Include how tribalism touches each part of the accountability ecosystem---it's deeply ingrained in how government functions, how the media runs, how citizens interpret media.

Kenya's media system has evolved from one that basically served colonial interests in the last decades before political independence in the early 1960s, to the wholly commercial establishment that it is today. In the decades following independence, the emphasis was mostly on development journalism. The media were seen to play a critical role in aiding and complementing the state's development efforts. The struggle for greater democratic space starting in the 1980s, and soon after, the collapse of the global order of the  Cold War, heralded a different moment for the Kenya media. Its role was now seen as expanding democracy and supporting aspirations for a more open society. The 2010 Constitution in a sense was premised on this ideal and has attempted in large measure to give it expression. Indeed, this is the reason, many have tended to reference this Constitution as a major turning point for Kenya's media and press freedom ideals. After KANU- the independence political party finally left power in 2002, and President Moi exited the political scene, there was a glimmer of hope, as his new administration began to implement policy changes amenable to a free and independent media. However, a few years into his term first term, Kibaki, like his predecessors realized the critical role of  the ethnic identity card in Kenya's politics.The shift that was taking place in the general policy direction favored by Kibaki and influenced strongly influenced by patronage politics, also started to affect and shape mainstream media's approach to the issues of the day. Highly factionalized segments of the media began to assert themselves a long political and ethnic lines as mainstream media gradually got sucked into alignments with the different ethno political formations of the day. Although the 2010 Constitution has provided an important framework for nurturing a functional watchdog media, this aspiration has mostly remained illusive. The current Kenyatta administration has since 2013, harped onto these already existing weaknesses and further factionalized the media to support patronage politics. It is also during this period that the link between Kenya's media, transitional politics and ethnicity has become apparent. Indeed, as the contest for political power in a highly ethnicized Kenyan political environment has intensified, so have been the demands on the media, mostly by establishment politicians to support their cause. Yet, ethnicity is such an integral element and deeply entrenched in Kenya's political, social and economic sphere.This is the very environment in which  Kenya's media have to continually struggle to function as democratic and civic spaces of engagement. It is an environment in which political contests are also by extension, ethnic contests, and citizens vote, defensively, along ethnic lines. Media owners are also mostly key political players in this very landscape. Media managers are therefore forced to skew editorial policies in favor of the owners and the views that they hold regarding the politics of the day. Owners of media will therefore tend to hire key editorial managers from their own ethnic groups while also ensuring that the general editorial policy is focused to strengthen and promote the collective sense of belonging of  the ethno-political block.  At the macro national level, this trend and or strong nexus between ethnicity, media and politics in Kenya has continually constrained media's role as the watchdog. It is therefore not surprising that public assessments of the performance of Kenya's media, are mostly guided by the extent to which a particular media institution is  perceived to be supportive of a particular ethno-national agenda, and not the universal tenets of good journalism as defined by Western normative theoretical frameworks.
