# The Accountability Ecosystem in Kenya Today

Understanding the current Kenyan media landscape, and its strength as a public gatekeeper and watchdog, requires examining the strength and character of media's relationship with the other "accountability ecosystem" constituents: **Government**, **Citizens**, and **Civil Society Organizations** (CSOs). As this study attempts to show, interactions between media and these constituents create pressures and incentives which influence media's ability to provide independent, unbiased reporting on issues of public interest. This report analyzes these pressures, as well as media's responses, in order to understand how different factors influence the ability of media to conduct robust, critical, and independent journalism.

{% include figure.html src="/assets/img/on_graphic_intro.png" %}

In the first section, we look inside the Media itself to explore how financial struggles are forcing establishment media companies to downsize their newsrooms, which in turn has contributed to a decline in the quality of reporting and the capacity of journalists. We also look at gender imbalances within Kenya's media, which has implications for the future leadership of women in media organizations. We then explore the role of the other three constituents---Government, Citizens, and CSOs---and the pressures and incentives they bring to bear on Kenyan media's ability to produce high quality, unbiased reporting in the public interest. We visually assess the impact of these pressures through a Free and Fair Scale, which illustrates whether a particular incentive or pressure is contributing to a stronger media landscape, or weakening it. For example, a decline in revenue for establishment media has forced staff layoffs, reducing the media's capacity to produce sustained reporting on important issues, while leaving many journalists economically vulnerable. This would receive a negative score on our scale, because the media now has reduced capacity to fulfil its mandate as an agenda setter, informant, and public watchdog.

We define civil society organizations (CSOs) broadly in this report, encompassing community-based organizations, religious organizations, and other non-governmental and non-commercial groups.

<!-- Include content as a variable -->
{% capture influenceOfEthnicity %}{% include /content/2.0.1_influenceOfEthnicity.md %}{% endcapture %}
<!-- markdownify the variable -->
{% capture influenceOfEthnicity %}{{ influenceOfEthnicity | markdownify }}{% endcapture %}
<!-- include the flyOut function and pass in the variable content -->
{% include flyOut.html type="Important:" title="The Influence of Ethnicity" id="influenceOfEthnicity" content=influenceOfEthnicity %}
