### How media copes

The media industry has largely buckled under this government pressure. Most establishment media organizations have adopted a detrimental culture of self-censorship amongst both journalists and editors, and shrink away from critical coverage. However, there are some courageous journals who are willing to take risks, pushing back on government intimidation and pushing to the limits of censorship. But these are the exception, not the rule.

<div class="flexColumns">
<h4 class="col-1-2">Defensive coverage</h4>
{% include meter.html effect="negative" amount="75" %}
</div>

The culture of self-censorship prevalent in newsrooms today is much more restrictive than explicit owner influence. Journalists and editors generally maintain an acute awareness of the networks between powerful individuals and interests. They often end up doing most of the "government censorship" work themselves, avoiding any topic that could potentially draw the ire of their bosses and related politicians. Many engage in shallow, low-quality reporting, often simply "repeating the official government line," which is much safer (and easier) than taking even small risks.

<div class="flexColumns">
<h4 class="col-1-2">Adopting corruption</h4>
{% include meter.html effect="negative" amount="100" %}
</div>

Many respondents reported that it is common for journalists and editors to accept government offers of corruption. This is partly driven by the culture where political connections (instead of quality journalism) are highly prized. One respondent noted that young journalists see frequent evidence that corruption is rewarded, such as editors driving cars far beyond their salary range.

Corrupt practices extend to both the organizational and the individual level. For example, a journalist might accept a one-time payment to omit certain details, or the arrangement might be extended; one respondent described the "symbiotic" relationship between an entire government agency and a publication, which agreed to provide only favorable coverage in exchange for exclusive access to that agency.

<div class="flexColumns">
<h4 class="col-1-2">Standing in solidarity</h4>
{% include meter.html effect="positive" amount="25" %}
</div>

Some journalists resist government pressure and corruption, and seek ways to bring critical coverage to the public. The most commonly cited strategy was sharing coverage and leads in solidarity. Some journalists will pass along promising leads to a colleague, seeking to make a story public even if they themselves feel unable to publish it. Others described circulating leads around to many journalists to ensure widespread coverage---a practice one respondent described as "spreading the risk." Examples/quotes here.

<div class="flexColumns">
<h4 class="col-1-2">Calling out government intimidation (positive action)</h4>
{% include meter.html effect="positive" amount="50" %}
</div>

Journalists also seek to draw public attention to the fact of government intimidation itself. One respondent said it was sometimes effective to respond publicly and aggressively to efforts at intimidation, naming the individuals issuing threats, in order to draw public anger and rally other journalists to stand in solidarity. Example here.

<!-- Include content as a variable -->
{% capture grassrootGroups %}{% include /content/2.1.2.1_grassrootGroups.md %}{% endcapture %}
<!-- markdownify the variable -->
{% capture grassrootGroups %}{{ grassrootGroups | markdownify }}{% endcapture %}
<!-- include the flyOut function and pass in the variable content -->
{% include flyOut.html type="Case Study:" title="Scrappy Grassroot Groups Push Back" id="scrappy-grassroot-groups-push-back" content=grassrootGroups %}
