### Scrappy Grassroot Groups Push Back

Bloggers are a relatively new part of the Kenyan media ecosystem, and respondents described a high level of distrust for them in the larger media community. However, many bloggers seem to know and trust one another. This may be largely thanks to the influence of the grassroots network established by the Bloggers Association of Kenya (BAKE).

BAKE started in 2011 and grew as a membership group to support individual bloggers while also focusing on policy issues. Members get a card, which they can use to access press events, and they proudly display membership badges on their blogs. The organization also provides legal representatives for bloggers to access through the network.

While its impact is still nascent, BAKE is actively combatting government intimidation through solidarity. Following massive superfluous arrests of bloggers, BAKE has spearheaded a campaign for media rights, called #iFreeKE. Working with and learning from key long-time internet freedom advocacy groups in Kenya, the organization has played a key role in pushing for policy reform that protects bloggers. They are also sharing their lessons by conducting trainings around Kenya to increase the number of bloggers, and to develop bloggers' ability to manage risk through modules on digital security and legal issues.

The organization previously received funding from HIVOS East Africa, which they used to create the citizen journalism website [Kenya Monitor](http://monitor.co.ke); however, the project has largely been abandoned due to lack of funding.

BAKE is one of a few grassroots groups (Network of Freelance Journalists is another) which are organizing to protect media actors and advocate for greater freedom. These efforts are currently largely isolated and under-resourced; additional funding and support is needed to accelerate their impact.
