## Constituent 1: Government

The government is by far the media's largest and most insidious antagonist in Kenya. The space for political dissent has contracted rapidly since 2013---Example?. This chilling effect has been exceptionally palpable in the press, as the Kenyatta administration has targeted media actors with increasing aggressiveness.

-   This is partly due to the character of the Kenyatta administration. A number of respondents described:  

-   An authoritarian and anti-democratic disposition by the current leadership, which can be attributed to its relationship to Jomo Kenyatta and his successor Daniel arap Moi, who held onto power for 24 years.

-   Anger by the current administration toward the media and civil society, which they perceived backed and kept alive the International Criminal Court case against the incumbent president. [Example: Need a few more details on the ICC case]

-   Rampant, blatant and accelerating corruption by the administration, which they do not want to stop

If Kenyatta is defeated in the October election, there may be new space for the media to stretch its muscles. Anything more about the election - to discuss?  

Yet no matter the outcome, the press has already been dramatically weakened by government attack, and a dangerous precedent has already been set. Citizens have little trust in media. Journalist morale is low. The government's interconnected, concerted effort has effectively declawed the media in the short term; a holistic approach will be necessary, and quickly, if the country's media is to recover.

### Pressures and incentives on media

The effort to stifle media criticism was described by many respondents as both intentional and strategic. The government has made a multi-pronged attack on press freedom, using almost every available tool to weaken the press, including both extreme methods of violence and intimidation to the more-subtle-but-no-less-powerful tools of economic and political pressure, as well as legal and judicial attacks. We will look at each of these in detail:

#### Violence and intimidation

-   Human Rights Watch has documented XX instances of journalist intimidation, including XX murders of journalists.

-   Politicians will pay for "moles" in newsrooms to give them information about who specifically published critical articles.

#### Political pressure

Ownership of local media is perhaps the most glaring and widely cited flaw in Kenya's media landscape. All of the major media houses in Kenya have significant political ties. Those that are not directly owned by a politician, or by someone affiliated with a political party, have clear commercial interests that depend on the good graces of politicians.

-   The Standard, for example, is owned by the Moi family, which has a clear stake in all political reporting, need description here.

-   The Nation, on the other hand, is owned by Aga Kahn, need description here; Kahn's commercial interests make him sensitive to political issues, as his business success depends on politicians' good graces.

[Graphic: Big Kenya media houses and their ownership?]

Owners yield explicit and implicit influence over press coverage, creating a culture of self-censorship and delicate coverage.

-   The government is also reportedly not shy about forcing these politically connected media outlets to fire "troublesome" journalists and editors who publish unfavorable articles.

-   A number of high profile firings have taken place, many attributing to offending ownership of the company. Oft cited examples:

-   Denis Galva need details

-   Gado - need details

#### Economic pressure

Financial considerations are a challenge for media all over the world; in Kenya, the government has made a concerted effort to undermine media's financial stability, which has had a strong cooling effect on the traditional media ecosystem.

As in other countries, traditional media houses in Kenya are fully dependent on advertising revenue (as newspaper circulation revenue has taken a large hit as people have turned online).

-   The government has historically been one of the two main sources of advertising revenue in Kenya (with corporate clients being the other).

-   The government has nearly ceased advertising, which has had a major economic impact on the media. This seems to have been a conscious choice in order to hurt the media.

-   The government has pulled almost all of its advertising from traditional media, centralized all ads purchasing through a single agency, the Government Advertising Agency. What year did this happen? The government also created its own ad publication, MyGov, which is both an online web portal and an insert found in published newspapers. This has proven to be an effective strategy for the government to undermine the financial stability of traditional media, while eliminating its dependence on the media to communicate with the public.

-   A few respondents noted that the arrangements by which MyGov is included in daily publications appears to be a secretive agreement.

-   In some cases, the government is also failing to pay for ads that have already run; The government reportedly owes the Nation and the Standards millions of dollars in unpaid ad debts

-   The result has been a decline in government ad revenue of XXXX, costing thousands of newsroom jobs.

-   Side Note: The practice of censorship-through-advertising has extended to corporate advertisers as well; a number of respondents noted that corporate interests are not shy about threatening to withdraw advertising if unfavorable coverage is published or broadcast.

Having undermined the revenue at the field level, the government is also taking advantage of individual journalists who are in economically precarious positions:

-   The government hires away good journalists into its communications shops

-   Or pays journalists and editors to omit stories and give favorable coverage.

-   Need example here.  

#### Legal pressure

While the Kenyan constitution protects freedom of the press, respondents noted that the government is successfully manipulating the legal and regulatory environment to intimidate and silence journalists.

-   For example, the Media Council of Kenya (established in XXLaw) is meant to serve an independent oversight role, including Xquick description of duties, etcXX.

-   However, although some programmatic funding comes from donors like XX and XX, the Council is dependent on the government for its core funding---which the government has withheld since  year.

-   The government has simultaneously attempted to co-opt the Council's mandate by moving specific functions into the purview of other agencies, which are completely government-controlled, such as XX and XX. To insert some concrete outcomes of this shift.

-   The government has also pursued legal action against critical journalists by suing for libel. A number of respondents, however, noted at least partial confidence in the independence of the courts. One respondent noted that it really depends on individual judges. Nevertheless, some of these libel awards can be devastating for media houses and, more importantly, for independent journalists. Possible example: Journalists joke that their only trainings on the job are "how not to get sued for libel."

To discuss: Call-out box about local pressures? Link to "Local pressures" section?

[BOX]  Social media as a tool to undermine the press

-   The government has become adept at using social media to manipulate perceptions.

-   The government also reportedly considers itself a "digital government", and have employed strategies to manipulate online perceptions

-   In addition to actually using social media for self-promotion, a number of respondents reported that bloggers were paid to produce favorable content, troll adversaries, and traffic in rumor and fake news

-   One prominent blogger, Robert Ailes, once a critic of the government, has been accused of taking money from the government in return for favorable coverage

-   Note about Kenyatta's partnership with Cambridge Analytics -- to investigate?

### Media coping strategies

For the most part, the ways that journalists and media organizations have responded to government attacks reflect the severity of those attacks. Across the board, the media industry has responded to these pressures by bending to the government's will and shrinking away from critical coverage.

-   Note: This is a difficult environment! It's difficult to blame the media for evolving strategies for coping, keeping in mind that it is difficult at this point to assess their success

-   Some courageous journalists are willing to take risks in the face of political consequences. They are finding ways to continue publishing critical coverage in at least some arenas, pushing back on government intimidation:

#### Defensive coverage

-   Journalists and editors self-censor; they have evolved a number of strategies to deal with the pressures that often result in self-censorship and poor quality reporting.

-   Many maintain an acute awareness of how powerful individuals and interests are interconnected and how a story might come back to bite, and then avoid those topics.

-   Graphic: Outcome of this strategy [Design note - this graphic will recur throughout all 'coping strategies']

#### Seeping corruption

In the low pay, high pressure media environment, many respondents noted that a number of journalists and editors have accepted corrupt practices (acquiescing to a government strategy). Many respondents commented on journalists taking money to report favorably, or to omit details.

-   One respondent noted that young journalists are seeing editors driving cars far beyond their salary range, and forcing journalists to say "I want that."

-   One respondent described one government agency, which established a symbiotic relationship. The agency would provide exclusive coverage to only one publication. In return, that publication would only provide favorable coverage.

-   Graphic: Outcome of this strategy.

#### Standing in solidarity

-   Some journalists who feel they cannot report on particular individual or issue, will pass promising leads to colleagues who can. Others will circulate leads around to many journalists, so that coverage is more widespread---a practice that one respondent described as "spreading the risk."

-   In fact, solidarity among journalists was probably one of the most cited strategies for risk mitigation. Need examples/quotes.

-   Graphic: Outcome of this strategy.

#### Calling out government intimidation

-   Journalists also seek to draw public attention to the fact of government intimidation itself.

-   One journalist noted that for particularly incendiary topics, it is important to go hard, publicly naming individuals who are threatening them, while at the same time rally other journalists to stand in solidarity.  Need an example?

-   Graphic: Outcome of this strategy.

[CASE STUDY]:  Need a good example here - perhaps journalists who spread the risk with a particular news tip to multiple outlets?
