### Early Attempts at Fact-Checking Fail to Move Government

Fact-checking is a core value of good journalism. In the age of social media, fact-checking is a steep but vital challenge facing media actors all over the world. In Kenya, a few start-up media outlets have attempted to fill Kenya's fact-checking gap, with mixed approaches.    

The Nation newspaper has instituted a fact-checking effort, [Newsplex](http://www.nation.co.ke/newsplex/2718262-2718262-3vbltsz/index.html). While some applauded the effort, other respondents suggested that the initiative focuses more on what politicians are saying---seeking "gotcha moments"---as opposed to the implications of the issues at stake. It's also been criticized for not being updated quickly enough.

Africa Check is an independent fact-checking organization, serving Senegal, Nigeria, and South Africa---and most recently Kenya. It's a journalist-facing organization, rather than a consumer-facing one. Seeking to change the status quo within the media industry, the organization posts the majority of its fact-checking work online. Its target audiences include journalists, media actors, as well as politicians and government actors; they receive reports through a mailing list, social media, or the website directly. Africa Check also hosts a weekly TV show, challenging politicians' incorrect statements on the air. The show's producers see their work as part of constructive debate, although they recognize that many viewers see these more superficially, as political maneuvers.

Both of these fact-checking efforts have found that government officials are mostly unwilling to retract false statements even when corrected. Respondents also criticized Africa Check for its relative slowness in relation to the news cycle; they also reported that the forum was not prominent enough to influence media, government, or public opinion.
