### How media responds

Cumulatively, through an appetite for news and information and especially through a passion for social media, citizens in Kenya today are putting pressure on the media industry to innovate and improve its work. Unfortunately, due to structural corruption in the field, many of the media's efforts are having neutral, or even negative, effects.

<div class="flexColumns">
<h4 class="col-1-2">Trying to be everything to everyone</h4>
{% include meter.html effect="negative" amount="50" %}
</div>

Recognizing that the public consumes a wide variety of media, many establishment outlets have struggled to identify and stick to a specific market or target audience. Instead, as one respondent told us, establishment media is "trying to be everything to everybody."

This not only fails to develop loyal followers, but undermines an outlet's credibility, as salacious scandal-driven coverage appears alongside serious information in the public interest. In [previous research](http://westafricamedia.reboot.org/), Reboot saw that online outlets in Nigeria which similarly sought to "be everything to everybody" failed to build loyal audiences. In Kenya, even a cursory glance at the front pages of leading newspapers, the Daily Nation and the Standard, suggests their strategies are weak, and show they are struggling to acquire and maintain an audience. When headlines like XXXX and XXX exist together on the front pages, it hurts the credibility of these organizations to be a check on government accountability.

[IMAGE: newspaper front page]

At its core, this is about media failing to understand the audience. There seems to be a gap between what our urban respondents want in their reporting and what traditional media believes they want. A group of students interviewed were frustrated with media's failing to cover topics they were interested in, such as technology and innovation; respondents complained that traditional media houses just assumed that young people want tabloids and gossip.

<div class="flexColumns">
<h4 class="col-1-2">Covering stories to avoid charges of bias</h4>
{% include meter.html effect="negative" amount="50" %}
</div>

The widespread public perception that media outlets are politically biased because of ownership or tribal affiliation has influenced newsroom standards in an unusual way. Recognizing the public's perception, many editors seek to "balance" their coverage, especially in editorials, by publishing equal numbers of stories about opposing party leaders. One journalist cited the 2010 folding of the Kenyan Times as a direct result of choosing to support one political party, showing that the media believes in the importance of "appearing" balanced.

But given the need to avoid overly negative coverage of people and issues with which ownership has a vested interest as well, this strategy fails to truly balance coverage---audiences continue to see both bias and shallow reporting. The flaw was on full display during the election campaign: If a negative story came out about a candidate, many papers seemed to feel compelled to publish a negative story about the candidate's opponent, in order to avoid accusations of political favoritism.  The public's reaction to this tactic has been largely critical.

<div class="flexColumns">
<h4 class="col-1-2">Covering stories that break on social media</h4>
{% include meter.html effect="positive" amount="50" %}
</div>

The pressure of social media, where news breaks more quickly, is also putting competitive pressure on editors and journalists. Almost all media respondents noted that breaking news has become the domain of social media; stories that might otherwise have been censored, self-censored, or ignored by the establishment media gain traction online, where public attention eventually often forces newspapers and television stations to cover the issues. For example, 30 people were rushed to the hospital after a cholera outbreak at a hotel this summer. Because the hotel was affiliated with a prominent politician in the Kenyatta administration, some respondents suggested the outbreak would have been ignored if not for social media; the story was covered critically in establishment outlets, including [The Nation](http://www.nation.co.ke/counties/nairobi/government-apparent-attempt-cover-up-cholera-outbreak-weston/1954174-3986100-11xk3ci/index.html).

Another positive effect of this pressure is that social media has forced establishment media to think more strategically about its competitive advantage, when it can no longer break news. At least one respondent working in digital news argued that his organization's added value was in taking the time to fact check, and clarify issues. While this viewpoint is reassuring, it seems to be far from the mainstream approach across Kenya's big media players.

<!-- Include content as a variable -->
{% capture effortsToFactCheck %}{% include /content/2.2.2.1_effortsToFactCheck.md %}{% endcapture %}
<!-- markdownify the variable -->
{% capture effortsToFactCheck %}{{ effortsToFactCheck | markdownify }}{% endcapture %}
<!-- include the flyOut function and pass in the variable content -->
{% include flyOut.html type="Case Study:" title="Early Attempts at Fact-Checking Fail to Move Government" id="fact-checking-fails-to-move-government" content=effortsToFactCheck %}

<!-- #### Shifting to digital platforms -->

<div class="flexColumns">
<h4 class="col-1-2">Shifting to digital platforms</h4>
{% include meter.html effect="positive" amount="50" %}
</div>

A few journalists have had success publishing content digitally, in order to circumvent the constraints of establishment media organizations and to tap directly into citizens' trust of social media. Common platforms are personal websites, Facebook, and YouTube. A (very) few of these journalists have been able to build sizeable followings, often through publishing news analysis (rather than investigative journalism or news coverage).  For example, [Owaahh](http://owaahh.com/) and [Guthara's Worl](https://gathara.blogspot.com/)d were two blogs frequently cited to us.

A number of respondents in the media sector acknowledged the importance of bloggers specifically for their ability to cover stories that would be censored at establishment media houses. Publishing online liberates journalists from reliance on ad revenue and the pressures of ownership (although they are still subject to government intimidation). While it is difficult to sustain financially, publishing online connects journalists more closely to citizen voices, as they are interacting in real-time online---this has the potential to establish a positive feedback loop.

Unfortunately, this digital-first publishing leaves out the millions of Kenyans who lack internet access, and still rely heavily on radio as their main source of information.

<div class="flexColumns">
<h4 class="col-1-2">Narrow Content-Focused Outlets</h4>
{% include meter.html effect="positive" amount="25" %}
</div>

To maneuver around establishment media, some small publications are popping up with niche target audiences; these are largely staffed by freelance journalists, creating a valuable step for career growth. For example, Smart Farmer, a quarterly agricultural magazine distributed at the local level, repeatedly employs the same freelance journalists, which allows them to begin specializing, giving them the opportunity to dive deeper into situations on-the-ground, and to develop an understanding of their audiences.

<div class="flexColumns">
<h4 class="col-1-2">Innovating digitally</h4>
{% include meter.html effect="positive" amount="75" %}
</div>

Many outlets are struggling to catch up to the digital age of media. Some establishment media houses have set up digital portals that unintentionally compete with the print editions. Others report having a single editorial strategy across print and digital. All media outlets are struggling to monetize their digital content. However, respondents working at establishment media houses frequently discussed the importance of digital work, and the pressure from social media to shift the kind and style of content that newsrooms publish. A respondent at The Nation discussed expanding the newspaper's online presence, incorporating video and interactive storytelling methods, which are only possible online; he told us that since social media has taken over the role of breaking news, they are trying to find new angles to stories and to provide deeper coverage with more context.

There seems to be a large gap in digital leadership in establishment media. The major counterexample is Wachira Waruru, who leads Royal Media Services, a company that runs fourteen radio stations and the popular entertainment television channel Citizen TV. Waruru has shown a willingness to embrace new technologies, keeping in touch with technology and hiring a director of social media. He also seems more in touch with audience diversity (the company produces radio content in 12 different languages). This adaptiveness to technology has proven to be a successful business strategy, as the company has overtaken longer-running media companies.

<!-- Include content as a variable -->
{% capture exploreAlternativeChannels %}{% include /content/2.2.2.2_exploreAlternativeChannels.md %}{% endcapture %}
<!-- markdownify the variable -->
{% capture exploreAlternativeChannels %}{{ exploreAlternativeChannels | markdownify }}{% endcapture %}
<!-- include the flyOut function and pass in the variable content -->
{% include flyOut.html type="Case Study:" title="New Businesses Explore Alternative Channels" id="new-businesses-explore-alternative-channels" content=exploreAlternativeChannels %}
