### How government pressures and incentivizes media

<blockquote class="floatLeft">
  <p>Every major media house in Kenya is owned by either a politician, a close party affiliate, or a business person with other commercial interests that depend on politicians’ good graces.</p>
</blockquote>

In its efforts to limit press freedom, the state has taken advantage of many tools, including, in some circumstances, violence and intimidation. In a [recent report](https://www.hrw.org/report/2017/05/30/not-worth-risk/threats-free-expression-ahead-kenyas-2017-elections), Human Rights Watch and Article 19 documented a worrying trend of journalist intimidation. However, outright violence is not as common as the more-subtle tools of economic, legal, regulatory, and political pressure.

#### Political pressure

To varying extents, many Kenyan media houses have political entanglements, which influence their independence. Every one of the establishment media houses is owned by either a politician, a close party affiliate, or a business person with commercial interests that depend on politicians' good graces. One civil society respondent believed "there is no distinction between politicians and media. Politicians or their cronies own the media, which is a big challenge. Corporations who buy advertising also have links to politicians and will exert pressure on the media."

{% include figure.html class="fullWidth" src="/assets/img/on_graphic_mediaOwnership.png" alt="Map of media ownership in Kenya" %}

As owners wield influence over journalists' and editors' careers, politicians have been known to work their connections, resulting in a widespread sense of insecurity among journalists. "Politicians, particularly the ruling coalition, have influenced the removal of critical journalists from the newsrooms across various media institutions, hence depleting media of critical journalists," according to one respondent working on press freedom issues. He went on to say "the government flags enemy journalists, and then pressures editors to punish, marginalize, or fire them." Several recent, high-profile firings were cited as evidence, such as the firings of Daily Nation editor [Denis Galava](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/27/blow-to-kenyas-media-after-editor-sacked-for-criticising-president) and [cartoonist Gado](https://cpj.org/blog/2016/03/gado-blames-government-pressure-as-cartoonists-con.php).

#### Economic pressure

Government also wields economic leverage over Kenya's media. As discussed earlier, the government has historically been one of the main sources of advertising revenue in the country; large corporations, primarily banks and telecommunications firms, are the other key sources. Some [estimates](https://theconversation.com/how-african-governments-use-advertising-as-a-weapon-against-media-freedom-75702) place government advertising at 30 percent for the entire media industry. In a sharp departure, the government created the Government Advertising Agency (GAA) in 2015, which required all government departments to go through this agency before purchasing public advertisements. It then created its own advertising platform, "MyGov," a website and newspaper insert, where government agencies would now be required to place their ads, in lieu of purchasing advertising from Kenyan media. While the Kenyan government claimed that this shift was for efficiency, many in media and civil society [believe](https://www.standardmedia.co.ke/article/2001230743/jubilee-declares-advertising-blackout-on-local-media) that this was intended to wield greater influence over private media houses. As a result, this policy has eliminated the media's single largest sources of ad revenue.

Overall, the significant decline in ad revenue has cost thousands of newsroom jobs. The political influence of advertising also extends to corporate advertisers. A number of media respondents noted that corporate interests threaten to withdraw advertising if unfavorable coverage is published or broadcasted.

However, these new pressures are also driving media entrepreneurs to think creatively and experiment with new business models. Paywalls, online advertising, interactive web features, and social media were all cited as ways establishment media are trying to attract and strengthen audience engagement through online content. Media companies---both establishment and independent---have also launched efforts to strengthen fact-checking (Africa Check, The Nation's Newsplex), to support investigative journalism (Africa Uncensored), and to crowdsource content for independent reporting (Hivisasa, The Elephant).

#### Regulatory and legal pressure

The 2010 Constitution marked a major turning point for media regulation in Kenya. The new constitution provided, under Section 34, the establishment of the Media Council of Kenya, an independent regulatory body tasked with setting media standards, and regulating and monitoring compliance with those standards. Subsequent laws---enacted largely after the Jubilee government assumed power in 2012---have, in essence, undermined the independence of this body. The 2013 Media Act, a revision of a 2007 act by the same name, weakened the Council, which must look to the state for core support while trying to maintain its independence.

Further amendments to the law, under the Information and Communications Act of 2013, created two other regulatory bodies with more authority to intervene in the media: the Communications Authority and the Multimedia Appeals Tribunal. Unlike the Media Council, these institutions are not independent of the state but their roles duplicate the core functions of the Council.

Attention has been drawn to the Tribunal's role  in hearing complaints against journalists and media organizations, although this falls within the Media Council of Kenya's purview. It is however, the hefty fines of up to approximately USD 20,000 for individual media houses, and approximately USD 5,000 for individual journalists, that are most problematic. In a bid to avoid such severe penalties, media institutions and individual journalists are likely to self-censor or completely drop stories deemed politically sensitive. For many respondents, the creation of additional regulatory institutions is a deliberate effort by the state to create confusion within the regulatory regime and exercise greater control over the country's media.

Legal action by government officials against media organizations has been another strategy for attacks against the press. The threat of lawsuits hangs over media houses. One respondent joked that journalists are trained in "how not to get sued." Another journalists noted that "the fines are beyond the budgets of many media houses, especially independent media, bloggers, or online news sites." Fortunately, respondents generally reported faith in the independence of the courts. In February 2018, the courts demonstrated this by [ordering the government](https://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-kenya-politics/kenya-government-ignores-court-order-suspending-shutdown-of-three-tv-stations-idUKKBN1FL4V5) to allow four television stations back on the air after they had been forced to stop broadcasting following their coverage of the mock inauguration of opposition politician Raila Odinga. It was several days, however, before the government complied with the court's orders.

<!-- Include content as a variable -->
{% capture socialMediaUnderminePress %}{% include /content/2.2.1.1_socialMediaUnderminePress.md %}{% endcapture %}
<!-- markdownify the variable -->
{% capture socialMediaUnderminePress %}{{ socialMediaUnderminePress | markdownify }}{% endcapture %}
<!-- include the flyOut function and pass in the variable content -->
{% include flyOut.html type="Heads up:" title="Social media as a tool to control public messaging" id="social-media-tool-undermine" content=socialMediaUnderminePress %}
