### Scrappy Grassroot Groups Push Back

Since 2007, when they helped skirt the government-imposed media blackout following the  presidential elections, bloggers have become an increasingly important source of information. A number of bloggers, such as [Owaahh](http://owaahh.com/) and [Gathara's Worl](https://gathara.blogspot.com/)d, have found ways to provide critical and independent analysis. However, as bloggers grow more prominent, they are not immune to the political and economic pressures faced by professional journalists. In 2016, the Bloggers Association of Kenya (BAKE) [documented](https://www.nation.co.ke/news/60-bloggers-arrested-in-Kenya-this-year-report/1056-3470388-1e9204z/) the arrest of 60 bloggers. At the same time, while some bloggers are being attacked, others are paid for favorable articles and online campaigns against political opponents. Multiple respondents commented that bloggers are paid to damage reputations. As a result, there are legitimate concerns about the independence and trustworthiness of bloggers.

BAKE is seeking to build the credibility of Kenya's bloggers. The organization started in 2011 and grew as a membership group to support individual bloggers, while focusing on policy issues such as freedom of speech and government intimidation. Members carry a card, which can be used to access press events; many members proudly display membership badges on their blogs.

BAKE is pushing back against government intimidation through solidarity. Following mass, superfluous arrests of bloggers in 2016, BAKE spearheaded a campaign for media rights, called #iFreeKE. The organization has played a role in pushing for policy reform that protects bloggers, publicly challenging the Film, Stage Plays and Publications Bill of 2016, and the ICT Practitioners Bill of 2016, both of which threatened freedom of speech.

BAKE is one of a few grassroots groups---Association of Freelance Journalists is another---organizing to protect media actors and advocate for greater freedom. These efforts are currently largely isolated and under-resourced.

{% include figure.html src="/assets/img/photo_bake.jpg" caption="BAKE Team, 2017" source="Facebook" %}
