### Early Attempts at Fact-Checking Fail to Move Government

In the age of social media, fact-checking is a steep but vital challenge facing media actors all over the world. In Kenya, some media outlets have attempted to fill Kenya's fact-checking gap, with mixed approaches.    

**The Nation** newspaper has instituted a fact-checking effort, [Newsplex](http://www.nation.co.ke/newsplex/2718262-2718262-3vbltsz/index.html). Some respondents applauded the effort, but research also surfaced criticism, including the suggestion that the initiative focuses more on "gotcha moments" as opposed to the issues at stake. Newsplex has also been criticized for not updating quickly enough.

**Africa Check** is an independent fact-checking organization, serving Senegal, Nigeria, and South Africa---and most recently Kenya. Seeking to change the status quo within the media industry, the organization posts the majority of its fact-checking work online. Its target audiences include journalists, media actors, as well as politicians and government actors,  who receive reports through a mailing list, social media, or the website directly. Africa Check also hosts a weekly TV show on KTN, challenging politicians' incorrect statements on the air. The show's producers see their work as part of constructive debate, although they recognize that many viewers see these more superficially, as political maneuvers.

Despite these fact-checking efforts, respondents noted that government officials are mostly unwilling to retract false statements even when corrected.
