### How media responds

Cumulatively, through an appetite for news and information and especially through a passion for social media, citizens in Kenya today are putting pressure on the national media industry to innovate and improve its work. However, due to structural challenges in the field, many of the media’s responses are having neutral, or even negative, effects.

<div class="flexColumns">
<h4 class="col-1-2">Trying to be everything to everyone</h4>
{% include meter.html effect="negative" amount="50" %}
</div>

Recognizing that the public consumes a wide variety of media, many establishment outlets have struggled to identify and stick to a specific market or target audience. Instead, as one respondent told us, establishment media is "trying to be everything to everybody." This not only discourages loyal followers, but undermines an outlet's credibility, as salacious scandal-driven coverage appears alongside serious information in the public interest. In [previous research](http://westafricamedia.reboot.org/), Reboot saw that online outlets in Nigeria which similarly sought to "be everything to everybody" failed to build loyal audiences.

At its core, this is about media struggling to understand its main audience. There seems to be a gap between what our urban respondents want in their reporting and what traditional media believes they want. A group of students interviewed were frustrated with media's failure to cover topics they were interested in, such as technology and innovation; respondents complained that traditional media houses just assumed that young people want tabloids and gossip. Our research suggests there is appetite for more diverse and niche media.

<div class="flexColumns">
<h4 class="col-1-2">Covering stories that break on social media</h4>
{% include meter.html effect="positive" amount="50" %}
</div>

The pressure of social media, where news breaks more quickly, is also putting competitive pressure on editors and journalists. Almost all media respondents noted that breaking news has become the domain of social media; stories that might otherwise have been censored, self-censored, or ignored by the establishment media gain traction online. For example, 30 people were rushed to the hospital after a cholera outbreak at a hotel in June 2017. Because the hotel was affiliated with a prominent politician in the Kenyatta administration, some respondents suggested the outbreak would have been ignored if not for social media (the story was covered critically in establishment outlets, including [The Nation](http://www.nation.co.ke/counties/nairobi/government-apparent-attempt-cover-up-cholera-outbreak-weston/1954174-3986100-11xk3ci/index.html)).

Another positive effect of this pressure is that social media has forced establishment media to think more strategically about its competitive advantage, when it can no longer break news. At least one respondent working in digital news argued that his organization's added value was in taking the time to fact check and clarify issues. While this viewpoint is reassuring, it seems to be far from the mainstream approach.

However, the benefits from these positive pressures mainly accrue to those who are urban and connected, which is a minority of the population. Most Kenyans are excluded from these benefits.

<!-- Include content as a variable -->
{% capture effortsToFactCheck %}{% include /content/2.3.2.1_effortsToFactCheck.md %}{% endcapture %}
<!-- markdownify the variable -->
{% capture effortsToFactCheck %}{{ effortsToFactCheck | markdownify }}{% endcapture %}
<!-- include the flyOut function and pass in the variable content -->
{% include flyOut.html type="Case Study:" title="Early Attempts at Fact-Checking Fail to Move Government" id="fact-checking-fails-to-move-government" content=effortsToFactCheck %}

<!-- #### Shifting to digital platforms -->

<div class="flexColumns">
<h4 class="col-1-2">Shifting to digital platforms</h4>
{% include meter.html effect="positive" amount="50" %}
</div>

A few journalists have had success publishing content digitally, circumventing the constraints of establishment media organizations and tapping directly into citizens' trust of social media. Common platforms are personal websites, Facebook, and YouTube. A few of these journalists have been able to build sizeable followings, often through publishing news analysis (rather than investigative journalism or news coverage). For example, [Owaahh](http://owaahh.com/) and [Gathara's Worl](https://gathara.blogspot.com/)d as well as [Hivisasa](http://www.hivisasa.com/) and [The Elephant](https://www.theelephant.info/) were online-first publishers cited in research. Unfortunately, this digital-first publishing leaves out the millions of Kenyans who lack internet access, and still rely heavily on radio as their main source of information.

A number of media sector respondents acknowledged the importance of bloggers specifically for their ability to cover stories that would be censored at establishment media houses. Publishing online liberates journalists from the political pressures of ownership (although not government intimidation). While it is difficult to sustain financially, publishing online also connects journalists more closely to citizen voices, as they are interacting in real-time online---this has the potential to establish a positive feedback loop.

<div class="flexColumns">
<h4 class="col-1-2">Innovating digitally</h4>
{% include meter.html effect="positive" amount="75" %}
</div>

Many outlets are struggling to catch up to the digital age of media. Some establishment media houses have digital and print editors who actually feel they must compete with each other for an audience. Others report having negotiated a single editorial strategy across print and digital. All media outlets are struggling to monetize their digital content. Nevertheless, respondents working at establishment media houses frequently discussed the importance of digital work, as more and more consumers come online. One respondent discussed expanding the newspaper's online presence, incorporating online video and interactive storytelling methods.

<!-- Include content as a variable -->
{% capture exploreAlternativeChannels %}{% include /content/2.3.2.2_exploreAlternativeChannels.md %}{% endcapture %}
<!-- markdownify the variable -->
{% capture exploreAlternativeChannels %}{{ exploreAlternativeChannels | markdownify }}{% endcapture %}
<!-- include the flyOut function and pass in the variable content -->
{% include flyOut.html type="Case Study:" title="New Businesses Explore Alternative Channels" id="new-businesses-explore-alternative-channels" content=exploreAlternativeChannels %}
