### New Businesses Explore Alternative Channels

Some media innovators and entrepreneurs are using alternative channels and models to reach citizens and engage them in new ways. While their success is mixed so far, their efforts provide a useful starting point for donors thinking about new models of storytelling:

Africa Uncensored considers itself "a business for social good." The company creates content, including investigative journalism, which it then sells to CSOs and others with strong grassroots networks and issue expertise. Africa Uncensored sees its role as exposing issues, naming protagonists (and antagonists), and then passing the work to others with nuanced expertise who can sustain public dialogue.

The group works closely with CSOs on stories, and to develop issue expertise. They are especially interested in long-term partnerships (one respondent listed citizen journalists as an example partnership). The group is also beginning to form distribution partnerships, for which it will experiment with smaller clips, docudramas, series segments, and other format innovations.

Well Told Story is another business established on the model of experimentation. It has a defined audience (young people, ages 15-24), and an explicit mission: to move youth from ignorance to action through creative storytelling on issues that affect Kenya. A for-profit company, funded by development donors (including Omidyar Network), Well Told Story produces comic books and radio programs, and also holds live events. They are invested in spreading their work online---for example, their comic book characters have Facebook pages, and interact with fans online.

The organization is also seeking to build dialogue between government and youth organizations through live events, bringing local officials to play games and "role play" with youth on issues they care about.

Well Told Story hints at the potential of alternative mediums for informing, educating, and mobilizing citizens in lieu of independent media. Given challenges with freedom of expression and outdated business models, establishment and aspiring independent media need to think in similarly creative ways about how to identify and engage their audiences.
