### How citizens pressure and incentivize media

<blockquote class="floatLeft">
  <p>Kenyans may trust the media more than they trust the government, but this is a very low bar.</p>
</blockquote>

Every respondent in this study expressed some level of frustration or mistrust of media---a finding consistent with research by Afrobarometer that found only 39 percent of Kenyans "[trust the media a lot](https://drive.google.com/file/d/0Bz6ORDgrjEYhdC1wTXlGeFlwSWM/view?usp=sharing)."

#### Low trust in media

Respondents were aware of the political relationships of the owners of establishment media organizations (see Constituent 2), and believe that these relationships influence coverage. This is a key driver of mistrust. To illustrate this, a university student explained, "Media in Kenya is not independent. [I know] because of the way the media houses report the news. Citizen TV, for example, changed its colors to be close to Jubilee." In fact, most citizen respondents believed media houses to be politically aligned. Another student said, "Media is run based on the business interest of somebody. We see the media houses who are either pro-left or pro-right. You can see how they cover stories. You also see self-censorship."

Media respondents were acutely aware of this perception. One editor noted that "covering politics is tricky. If you attack one side, you are branded as supporting the opposition." One strategy, described earlier, is to run an equal number of stories or columns perceived as pro- and as anti-government. However, despite the efforts of some editors to overcome these perceptions, respondents felt strongly that Kenya's media retain strong partisan bias. This feeling was reinforced by the well-known political relationships of media owners, and the belief that ownership strongly influences the types and angles of stories produced. These perceptions are also reinforced by the public's awareness that journalists are paid to write favorably about public figures.

#### Relying on social media

Internet usage estimates vary considerably in Kenya, from 26 percent, reported by the [International Telecommunications Union in 2016](https://www.itu.int/net4/itu-d/icteye/CountryProfileReport.aspx?countryID=125), to 90 percent, reported by the [Communications Authority (CA) in 2017](http://www.ca.go.ke/images/downloads/STATISTICS/SECTOR%20STATISTICS%20REPORT%20Q3%20FY%202016-2017.pdf). Despite the CA's highly optimistic estimation for internet users, social media use remains considerably lower across the country as a whole. Across Kenya's 48.5 million people, recent estimates suggest there are approximately [7 million Facebook users](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-kenya-election-facebook/facebook-offers-tool-to-combat-fake-news-in-kenya-ahead-of-polls-idUSKBN1AK1IU), [10 million WhatsApp users](https://ifree.co.ke/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/State-of-Internet-Report-Kenya-2016.pdf), and [2 million Twitter users](https://ifree.co.ke/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/State-of-Internet-Report-Kenya-2016.pdf). Nevertheless, in Nairobi, [where social media usage is most concentrated](http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/africaatlse/2017/09/04/the-tyranny-of-numbers-on-social-media-during-kenyas-2017-elections/), all three are important channels for accessing and triangulating information.

Many respondents expressed understanding of the potential for misinformation online, a finding backed by [a recent poll](http://blog.geopoll.com/geopoll-and-portland-launch-a-survey-report-on-fake-news-in-kenya) which found 90 percent of respondents reported having seen false or inaccurate news in relation to the general election. As one journalist said, "Digital has really impacted the newsroom. It has changed how people get news. But it has also empowered the purveyors of fake news." On one hand, some people believe that online conversations are fast, diverse, and resilient enough to challenge rumor, and surface the truth. However, others expressed the opposite opinion, calling Kenyans "uncritical," too quick to share news without evaluating it. There is truth to both statements. Social media is valuable in spreading news, but the risks of rumor mongering and manipulation are also real.

#### Triangulating information from multiple platforms

While there may be many factors, citizen respondents frequently noted that they rely on multiple sources for information to balance the perceived bias in media. By looking at several media outlets, they hope to gather multiple angles, understand the potential biases in individual pieces of coverage, and identify stories or details that have been entirely omitted. As one University of Nairobi student noted, "You just need to be smart and check multiple sources to not fall into the trap of fake news... If you watch one channel for long, you have a skewed mindset on certain issues and that is why it is necessary for us to watch as many channels so as to have a broad view of information from various sources."

Kenyans triangulate information through multiple outlets and across multiple mediums. They will read newspapers, watch television, and listen to the radio. Friends and family are an important source of validation, and social media has made it significantly easier to access, share, and validate information. Multiple audience respondents discussed the fact that they "trust" social media, because they trust their friends and family, who share information and engage in conversations with them on those platforms. Across the board, respondents most widely referenced using WhatsApp groups to monitor and share news with friends, colleagues, and family. Facebook and Twitter were also commonly cited, though the former more so.
