Citizen demand for news may be one of the Kenyan media's greatest advantages, as it suggests high growth potential. Kenyans consume a large quantity and wide variety of information and media. However, no outlet is well-positioned to meet Kenyans' needs for a reliable, independent news source that they feel they can trust.

In urban areas (where this research focused), Kenyans tend to be highly engaged in politics. However, our research indicated an emerging gap between younger and older generations, as younger Kenyans especially seemed tired of the endless parade of corruption scandals; many were uninterested in discussing governance issues. These respondents tended to consume media more for entertainment than information. Kenya is a young country, and projected to stay so for quite some time. Almost [three-quarters of the population is under 30](https://www.census.gov/population/international/files/at/AGTRNDKE.pdf) and with a median age of fourteen years old. It is important for media to reach this growing generation and build trust for the long-term.

The accountability ecosystem has functioned so poorly for so long, most Kenyans do not see a path for citizen voices to create change. There is widespread frustration with---and hopelessness about---corruption. One group of respondents noted that neither media coverage nor civil society advocacy mattered; no matter what happened, they felt Kenya's national leadership would never be held accountable for its blatant corruption. Kenyans simply don't see a clear path to good governance, and especially not through media transparency.
