## Constituent 3: Civil Society

In many ways, Kenya's civil society sector and its media sector are in the same boat. Like the media, civil society has a history and reputation for being relatively robust and professional compared to its neighbors in the region and the continent. And, like the media, civil society has been forced to work in a shrinking civic space, against an increasingly antagonistic government and with rapidly decreasing support from international donors.

-   The expulsion of IFES is a key example. XXXXX.

Yet despite their similar challenges---and their aligned governance goals---the two sectors are largely disconnected in Kenya, with negative perceptions and mistrust on both sides. In this section, we will look at the ways CSOs currently interact with the media, and both the negative and positive ways that media respond to these vital potential allies.  

### Pressures and incentives on media

CSOs are well aware of the need for media coverage to further their goals. The pressure they exert on journalists and media organizations in attempting to get that coverage takes a fairly limited form, due to their limited capacity.  

#### Pursuing coverage

-   A number of respondents commented on mistrust between CSOs and media.

-   CSOs see media as "lazy" or corrupt. They perceive that journalists will ask for payment in exchange for coverage. One member of a budget-focused CSO [Tim] noted that "media always want sensational stories and think the development issues can wait until tomorrow."

-   Example: [Tim] pitched a regional TV show, did a lot of work (wrote the questions), but the show was canceled; this created mistrust.  

-   Some respondents noted that many civil society actors have difficulty translating complex topics for a general audience---a key area with which journalists may support them, but XXXX.

#### Pulling political strings

-   CSOs have little budget to engage media, but some have found effective strategies.

-   One strategy that some CSOs found effective is to work with politicians in order to secure media coverage; if a politician shows up at an event, the media is more likely to show up, too. Example: XXXXX.

-   CSOs also open doors to the media by pulling the opposite political string---sympathy for public good journalism---seeking connections around shared political goals, such as XXXXX.

#### Offering help to journalists

-   Some CSOs have come up with creative strategies for developing relationships with journalists. These include offering co-located space for journalists to work at their offices, although this strategy has had mixed results XXXXX.

-   Other CSOs have hosted trainings for journalists in areas of interest, with XXXXX results.  

#### Building journalists' capacity

-   CSOs that focus directly on freedom of the press are, obviously, the most closely aligned---Human Rights Watch, Article 19, the Kenyan Correspondents Association, etc. The support they offer to the media has unfortunately declined in recent years.

-   For example, groups like Internews, the Association for Freelance Journalists, the Kenya Correspondents Association, and the AWCFS have all established "media development centers," where journalists could have access to workspace, a computer, internet, and mentorship. These centers also offered space for other CSOs---one CSO leader discussed attending monthly roundtables to discuss issues with journalists.

-   However, most? of these have closed in recent years, largely in tandem with the retreat of international funding. One respondent noted that decreased internet access costs and cheaper devices has reduced the need for these type of spaces, many people lamented their demise.

### Media coping strategies

-   On the whole, personal relationships are the only open channel---the broader field has a chilly relationship.

#### Seeking support for complex topics

-   Some journalists seek to connect with civil society as a way to tackle more complex topics.

-   The media relies on CSOs to help them cover complex topics. Need example.

-   Drawing on CSO people as columnists. Need example.

#### Attending to networked CSOs

-   Personal networks are the primary source of interaction -- journalists will respond to a personal CSO request for coverage.

-   The strongest approach appeared to be through personal networks between media and civil society. A number of CSO folks utilized personal connections to individuals in the media to get coverage without having to pay.

-   Need example.

-   This is because media often feel that CSOs are just seeking free publicity; they also believe CSOs fail to produce actually newsworthy events. There's also the perception that CSOs cater to international donors in place of public interest sometimes.

[CASE STUDY:]  An example?
