### Pressures and incentives (structural)

Across all mediums, most media companies have continued to struggle to find appropriate business models for a changing economic environment. As a consequence, leading companies have radically downsized over the past eighteen months. Nations Media Group, for instance, [closed two FM radio station](https://twitter.com/NationMediaGrp/status/748393955688128516/photo/1?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw&ref_url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.africanews.com%2F2016%2F06%2F30%2Fkenya-s-nation-media-group-shuts-down-tv-and-radio-stations%2F) (opting for an online stream) and consolidated two television stations into one. The Standard and Royal Media Groups have recently had massive layoffs as well.

#### Declining revenue, low morale

<blockquote class="floatLeft">
  <p>The profession as a whole in Kenya has suffered a noticeable decline, due to the economic pressures and government attacks.</p>
</blockquote>

A number of respondents noted the dramatic change in newsrooms over the last five to ten years. While capacity, ethics, and pay are perennial issues for many in media around the world, the profession as a whole in Kenya has suffered a noticeable decline, due to the economic pressures and government attacks.

The withdrawal of government advertising revenue was regularly cited as leading to the loss of thousands of jobs. For example, as part of the restructuring mentioned above, we heard that the Standard had laid off 1,500 people. Newsrooms have become increasingly dependent on freelancers and correspondents, who, without steady work and the backing of an institution, are more vulnerable to intimidation or cooptation. More than one respondent noted that this has resulted in a seemingly intentional "juniorisation" of the newsroom, which extends to editors as well. Without resources, mentorship, or professional support, young journalists are thrown into the deep end; all journalists are overstretched, as fewer staff are responsible for producing more content (and across multiple platforms).

-   The standards of ethics have degraded. [Quote/example].

-   Morale is low. [Quote/example].

#### Training is insufficient

There are of course many smart, talented, ethical, and professional journalists in Kenya. But broadly, capacity is such an issue that it came up in every conversation with journalists, editors, media experts, and civil society groups. While there was once a culture of mentorship amongst journalists, this has mostly disappeared, due to political pressures and low capacity. Many respondents also criticized the education system, saying young journalists are not leaving their communication schools with the hands-on skills and education they need to succeed in the newsroom. Many journalists lack the ability, let alone the time, to fact check and even do basic background research.

In response to these low capabilities, and to achieve quality standards needed to accredit journalists, the Media Council of Kenya operates a number of trainings (but some respondents said this distracts the organization from its real responsibility of regulating the industry).

International organizations and civil society also have tried to fill this gap.  A few international NGOS are providing mentorship and training; at least a few respondents referred to journalists as "overtrained," even though capacity remains an issue. These trainings, often referred to as "helicopter trainings," seemed to be designed based on donor goals, rather than an authentic understanding of journalists' needs. For example, respondents described a recent UNDP training that focused on best practices for reporting on the extractive industry; the training was apparently very clearly linked to other donor interests, rather than addressing larger capacity gaps. But even if trainings were well-designed and holistic, they would never be enough (on their own) to overcome economic, political, other structural drivers of the capacity gap.

#### Stark gender imbalance

The media must represent the people it serves---including in gender makeup. But while there are many women who want to be journalists, the field often shuts them out. A number of respondents noted that the many communication and journalism schools in the country are flush with aspiring female journalists, in some cases outnumbering men. But newsrooms are still heavily male dominated. For example, only 3 of the top editors at the Nation Media Group, one of Kenya's leading outlets, are female. During our research, we struggled to achieve gender balance in our respondents, due to the lopsided makeup of the field.

Respondents were willing to speculate about the imbalance, attributing it to society-wide asymmetries in gender power, among other things. A number of respondents also noted intense sexual harassment of young female journalists (which compounds a [global trend](https://ijnet.org/en/blog/how-newsrooms-can-fight-online-harassment-targeting-female-journalists) of online harassment and threats toward female journalists). The cumulative result is that young women are being forced out of newsrooms. This has serious long-term negative consequences, as media needs a pipeline of female journalists rising through the ranks of media in order to balance the field.

Female readers and viewers are a massive market for Kenyan media, with potential for huge growth. One editor noted that at his newspaper, male readership is 70 percent, which suggests great potential for growth with female readers.
