### Outrage, But No Coverage, For Key Political Events

The missed opportunities from weak relationships between media and CSOs was highlighted by one CSO respondent who described the lack of coverage relating to police accountability. As a result of this divide, civil society struggled to rally public condemnation of human rights abuses by the police.

Since 2012, Kenyan police have committed dozens of [extrajudicial killings](http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-38239138) in a mainly Muslim region of the country. Although the human rights group Haki Africa broke the story in December 2016, coverage remained largely absent from establishment media.

CSOs blamed the media's silence on government pressure. One CSO attempted to organize an event with elected leaders to raise awareness about the story, but several officials who had committed to attend---including one who had helped organize the event---stopped communicating at the last minute. Rumors suggested that an order not to attend had come from high-level political actors. Yet despite the failure of local media to cover it, the story trickled into mainstream consciousness through extensive international media coverage and through social media. But, respondents felt it still lacked the scale of awareness necessary to pressure government to respond. Without the collaboration and support of the Kenyan media, major CSO efforts to draw attention to the issue were unsuccessful in pressuring government to respond.

{% include figure.html src="/assets/img/photo_stop-extrajudicial-killings.jpg" caption="A group of people protesting against the killings of lawyer Willie Kimani and two others." source="Horn Diplomat" %}
