### How media responds (coping strategies)

Despite a few of the positive instances described above, the vast majority of CSOs lack strong media relationships, especially professionally; personal relationships seem to be the main open channel. Journalists therefore do not currently experience much pressure from CSOs (and perceive few incentives for working with them); the influence of the other constituents, government and citizens, is much more powerful. However, where media do respond to CSOs, some of their coping strategies are positive.

<div class="flexColumns">
<h4 class="col-1-2">Mistrust for CSOs</h4>
{% include meter.html effect="negative" amount="75" %}
</div>

As much as CSOs mistrust journalists, the feeling is mutual. Media respondents told us frequently that most CSOs are just seeking free publicity, and that they fail to understand what is "newsworthy," and therefore don't provide journalists with worthwhile information. There are also some perceptions that CSOs are catering to international donors at the expense of public interest. One journalist described the experience of meeting a CSO to do a human interest story, only to be fed a predetermined promotional story. When she asked deeper questions about the evidence of impact, the organization could not provide further documentation.

Within this mistrust, personal networks seem to be the primary source of interaction. Journalists will often respond, and even report on, CSO work based on a personal request, but respondents made a point to emphasize that these were the exception. One respondent told us that his CSO employs a number of former journalists: "We work with a selection of key journalists that we knew from when most of us were journalists ourselves. This helps with our advocacy."

<div class="flexColumns">
<h4 class="col-1-2">Seeking content support  </h4>
{% include meter.html effect="positive" amount="25" %}
</div>

When journalists have positive interactions with CSOs, they value the relationship, and will work with them on complex topics. For example, freelance journalists mention CSO roundtables as a great way to develop one-on-one relationships with individuals at civil society organizations. Especially for freelancers, who often get most of their work based on their professional relationships, these connections can be valuable.

There are also a few cases of CSO staff or leaders who regularly provide content for mainstream media outlets, or participate as commentators on TV news talk show programs. For example, Prof. Makau Mutua, current chair of the Kenya Human Rights Commission, writes a weekly column for the Sunday Standard; a number of other human rights lawyers and activists similarly contribute to establishment media.

Although rare, there are examples of CSO and media collaborations successfully leading to change. One respondent told us the story of a health facility, which was put at risk due to a land grab by government officials. Within a few hours of hearing the news, the CSO organized a demonstration with hospital patients, largely relying on WhatsApp for coordination. They simultaneously organized a press briefing in Nairobi for media. The attention successfully drew the attention of the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission, and within three weeks the land was returned to the health facility.

<!-- Include content as a variable -->
{% capture outrageNoCoverage %}{% include /content/2.4.2.1_outrageNoCoverage.md %}{% endcapture %}
<!-- markdownify the variable -->
{% capture outrageNoCoverage %}{{ outrageNoCoverage | markdownify }}{% endcapture %}
<!-- include the flyOut function and pass in the variable content -->
{% include flyOut.html type="Case Study:" title="Outrage, But No Coverage, For Key Political Events" id="outrage-but-no-coverage" content=outrageNoCoverage %}
