## Constituent 4: Media

The challenges facing the Kenyan media are structural. While the Kenyatta administration has been strategic in its attempts to weaken the press and silence critics, part of the blame for the success of these attacks lies in the field's inherent weakness---it is a media space dominated by a handful of large, politically connected media institutions.

In this section, as we turn to look at the media themselves, in the context of the previous findings, understanding that the pressures from the other three constituents are taking advantage of the field's inherent, structural weaknesses. We will explore the Media through the same framework--first of pressures and incentives, created by the field, then the coping strategies of individual journalists and editors.

### Pressures and incentives (structural)

#### Declining revenue, low morale

A number of respondents noted the dramatic change in newsrooms over the last five to ten years. While capacity, ethics, and pay are perennial issues for many in media around the world, the profession as a whole in Kenya has suffered a noticeable decline, due to the economic pressures and government attacks.

-   The withdrawal of government advertising revenue was regularly cited as leading to the loss of thousands of jobs. [Quote/example]. For example, the researchers heard that the Standard had laid off 1,500 people due to restructuring.

-   Newsrooms become increasingly dependent on freelancers, who, without steady work and the backing of an institution, are more vulnerable to intimidation or cooptation. One respondent noted that this has resulted in the "juniorisation" of the newsroom, which extends to editors as well.

-   [Visual: "Correspondents" and Freelancers in the Newsroom]

-   There are no resources to provide mentorship and support for young journalists, who are thrown right into the deep. And fewer journalists are responsible for producing more content, and working across multiple platforms to keep up with social media.

-   The standards of ethics have degraded. [Quote/example].

-   Morale is low. [Quote/example].

#### Stark gender imbalance

The media must represent the people it serves---including in gender makeup. But while there are many women who want to be journalists, the field often shuts them out.

-   A number of our respondents noted that the many communication and journalism schools in the country are flush with aspiring female journalists. In some cases, it was noted that they outnumber men. But newsrooms are still heavily male dominated.

-   There are only 3 female editors at XX, one of Kenya's leading outlets.

-   Our research struggled to achieve gender balance in respondents, which we suspect is due to the lopsided makeup of the field.

-   Respondents were willing to speculate about the imbalance, attributing it to society-wide asymmetries in gender power among other things. It is important to note that a number of respondents noted intense sexual harassment of young female journalists, which is likely in addition to a world-wide trend of online harassment and threats toward female journalists. The cumulative result is that young women are being forced out of newsrooms.

-   This has serious long-term negative consequences, as media needs a pipeline of female journalists rising through the ranks of media in order to balance the field.

-   Female readers and viewers are a massive market for Kenyan media, with potential for huge growth. One editor noted that at his newspaper, male readership is 70 percent, which leaves great potential growth (considering fifty percent of the country is female).

#### Training is insufficient

There are of course many smart, talented, ethical, and professional journalists in Kenya. But broadly, capacity is such an issue that it came up in every conversation with journalists, editors, media experts, and civil society groups. Many respondents criticized the education system, saying young journalists are not leaving their communication schools with the skills and education they need to succeed in the newsroom---even though journalists are required by law? to have journalism or communication degrees.

-   Note, this requirement was pushed by the newspaper owners, so that, as one respondent noted, they don't need to do training themselves.

-   Many journalists lack the ability to fact check and even do basic background research. Respondents jokingly noted that they only training they ever received at their respective news organizations was on libel laws, to try to avoid the media house from getting sued, as happens from time to time.

Donor trainings and civil society have tried to fill this gap.

-   One news organization? is sending students for an additional year of training; some international NGOS are providing mentorship and training.

-   At least a few respondents referred to journalists as "overtrained."

-   Details needed about helicopter trainings, and

-   Bottom line: Capacity gap is structural, trainings are not enough to overcome economic, political, other concerns.

### Media coping strategies (individual)

Journalists are work within an increasingly precarious field. We met many courageous and capable journalists who are committed to their role in the public interest, but are hamstrung by political and economic forces. They have a clear understanding of the media's role in society and a desire to work for the public good. But many acknowledged that they struggled to fulfill these roles, due to the pressure. The following coping strategies do not necessarily lead to positive outcomes for public interest journalism, but they are the result of conscious actors responding to nearly insurmountable circumstances.  

#### Lightweight reporting

As a result, quality and in-depth reporting is more rare; many journalists favor the easier routes of parroting press releases, or focusing their articles as "he said, she said," both strategies we heard from a number of respondents.

Are there more coping strategies? Many have been covered in previous sections - perhaps a recap here?

[CASE STUDIES/USER PERSONAS]: 1 journalist, 1 editor

SPOTLIGHT: JOURNALISM AT THE LOCAL LEVEL
----------------------------------------

The 2010 constitution devolved power to county governors, reallocating extensive resources and creating important power centers at the local level. But the local media is not up to the task of providing appropriate oversight of local government, which is responsible for service delivery including XXXX.

-   While our research focused mainly on urban and peri-Urban areas, particularly in Nairobi, the importance of good local media, and the lack of that media, emerged as a central theme in our research.

-   Given the dramatically different context, particularly in rural areas, additional research is much needed.

-   Nevertheless, we present here key themes that emerged; these are specific to the local media landscape.  

-   These factors are also at play locally. Here, we present additional challenges faced in this particular realm:

### Pressures & Incentives

-   The issues affecting national-level outlets are also very real challenges at the local level:

-   Ownership; a debilitating reliance on shrinking ad revenue; Interference, intimidation and capture by local governments; Low journalistic capacity.

-   But these constraints are often amplified at the lower level by particularly competitive and contentious politics, shifting political alliances, etc.

-   For example, there is no corporate ad revenue at the local level. One media actor noted that we "cannot monetize the rural areas."

#### Little competitive pressure between outlets

-   Unlike urban counterparts, which are pressured to cover stories that break in competing outlets, rural media are rarely forced to cover a story; they're the only game in town.

-   Competitive pressure from social media is also lower; Resources tend to be more constrained, particularly in rural areas, which means that even if people have the technology and the will to get more info, they might not be able to afford "bundles."

-   This is especially true in radio, which is a key source of information, particularly in local language, or vernacular radio

#### Closer relationship to government

-   At the same time, a number of respondents commented that elections are mainly decided in rural areas where people vote along tribal lines irrespective of candidate's platform.

-   The relationship between people and government is closer at the local level - there is potential for tighter accountability loops.

### Media coping strategies

-   Despite these constraints, some independent media has emerged locally.

#### Working closely with local organizations

-   Another theme that emerged was working closely with community based organizations (CBOS) and faith based organizations (FBOs). Need details

-   These organizations, rooted deeply in grassroots communities, were cited as both providing political cover for local media outlets, as well as helping media produce locally relevant news

[Case Study]:  Thikka - needs to be built out
