Like the media, Kenyan civil society has a history and reputation for being relatively robust and professional. Also like the media, civil society is working in a shrinking civic space, with decreasing support from donors, and under pressure from the Jubilee administration. For example, in 2015, the Kenyan government [froze the banks accounts ](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-kenya-rights/kenya-court-orders-reopening-of-rights-groups-bank-accounts-idUSKCN0T11MY20151113)of two Mombasa-based organizations, Muslims for Human Rights and Haki Africa, which had been critical of the government's anti-terrorism policies. (A Kenyan court subsequently ordered that their banks accounts be unfrozen.) In a more recent example, after the August 2017 election, Kenya's NGO regulator [attempted to shut down](https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2017/08/kenya-attempts-to-shut-down-human-rights-groups-unlawful-and-irresponsible/) two human rights organizations involved in election monitoring.

A strong, symbiotic relationship between civil society and the media is one of the most important potential connections in Kenya's accountability ecosystem. While it is the media's role to shine a light on issues of public interest, it is civil society's role to translate that information into policy change, by engaging government and mobilizing citizens. Highlighting the power of cooperation, a veteran freelance journalist said, "Media plays a role that goes beyond CSOs. While CSOs can lobby and negotiate with government, media has the power to pick the issues that people focus on." In Kenya, there is an opportunity to strengthen the connection between these sectors by highlighting their similar challenges and their aligned governance goals.
