### Pressures & Incentives

All of the issues affecting national-level outlets described in this report are very real challenges at the local level: media owners have political ties, ad revenues are shrinking, journalists are overstretched, and political actors seek to interfere with freedom of the press.

These constraints are amplified at the local level by competitive pressure and political alliances. For example, corporations almost never advertise in local media, as one respondent said "we cannot monetize the rural areas." This means local outlets are entirely dependent on political and government advertising.

#### Closer relationship to government

In addition to being tied more closely financially, local media outlets are tied more closely to government politically. A number of respondents noted that Kenyan elections are mainly decided in rural areas, where people are more likely to vote according to ethnic affiliations. This means local media are both more likely to be supportive of, and at the same time dependent on, government relationships. They are also more vulnerable if they offend local politicians.

Nevertheless, the potential for strong feedback loops based on media coverage is the highest at the local level. In theory, media coverage can highlight stories that directly impact citizens' lives, amplifying their concerns to smaller governments and leading to faster change in a virtuous cycle. But existing political allegiances and pressures at the local level, as well as lower online access, currently make these loops fragile.

<!-- Include content as a variable -->
{% capture citizensAdvocateForTown %}{% include /content/2.5.1.1_citizensAdvocateForTown.md %}{% endcapture %}
<!-- markdownify the variable -->
{% capture citizensAdvocateForTown %}{{ citizensAdvocateForTown | markdownify }}{% endcapture %}
<!-- include the flyOut function and pass in the variable content -->
{% include flyOut.html type="Case Study:" title="Citizens Advocate for Their Town" id="citizens-advocate-for-their-town" content=citizensAdvocateForTown %}

#### Lack of competitive pressure

While urban media can be pressured to cover politically difficult stories by competition from other outlets, rural media are usually the only local outlet. This is especially true with radio, which is a key source of information, and often broadcasts in local languages.

Similarly, while social media in urban areas is exerting pressure to cover difficult stories, access to the internet is much lower in rural areas, with data costs less affordable, meaning the pressure from social media is significantly lower.

#### Lack of capacity and peer support

While there is little competition between outlets and mediums, there is steep competitive pressure between journalists themselves. National outlets offer small local sections and hire freelance correspondents to cover stories in them. Many correspondents find themselves in a difficult competition with each other for these scant jobs.

This leads to a lack of peer support, which is especially challenging because local journalists have almost no opportunities for external capacity development. The funding for media is heavily concentrated in Nairobi; training and support opportunities are largely non-existent in rural areas.

#### Developing community allies

Journalists and CSOs at the local level are closer to each other than their counterparts in Nairobi. These relationships yielded successes for strong media coverage, suggesting that further collaborations are worth exploring. Respondents specifically discussed how working with faith-based organizations was an effective strategy. For example, the Network of Catholic Radios works through the Catholic diocese, which has many local religious affiliates throughout communities. Because these partner organizations are deeply connected to the grassroots, media actors reported that they can provide political cover, as well as support the production of locally relevant news.
