#### Funding Principles

Regardless of which discrete recommendations donors pursue, the current realities on the ground in Kenya dictate several "rules of the road" which should be followed by any supporter of media development in the country. These core principles, which should be incorporated into the design of all programs, are derived from specific issues identified in this research:

All media development investments must:

1.  Ensure investments are demand-driven, where Kenyan journalists define the problems, set priorities, and operationalize ideas. Also incentivize problem-driven approaches, using qualitative inquiry, user-centered design, and iteration.

2.  Develop and encourage networks, to break down the silos between disciplines that cut off potential opportunities.

3.  Invest for the long-term (ideally 5+ years), recognizing that independent media needs time to flourish, and diversify funding streams, recognizing that reliance on a single source of finance creates unnecessary risk.

4.  Define "sustainability" in the context of the deeply political Kenyan media market; sufficient independent commercial revenue sources may be impossible for the foreseeable future.

5.  Encode a system of ethics and quality standards to guard against the kind of capture and corruption that has undermined trust and quality in establishment media.

6.  Recognize that any "successful" effort is likely to be seen as a threat by the state, and be prepared to adapt accordingly.

7.  Include research into audience demographics and psychographics, and incentivize editors to develop a cohesive audience engagement strategy.  

8.  Be conscious of deeply entrenched ethnic biases and include efforts to address it.

9.  Strive for gender balance.
