## Volume & Sustainability

#### Fund alternative publishing platforms  

-   Fund (or establish?) alternative publishing platforms. Suggest building on successful young experiments and stand-out journalists.

-   Create physical spaces for journalists to gather, work, access internet, mentor (replace Internews' closed centers)

-   Fellowships or other learning experiences for Kenyan journalists to learn from international alternative media companies with the intention of boosting the content quality of kenyan media production to be distributed on international platforms (think Netflix, HBO, NewsDeeply, Vice etc).

#### Fund local and multilingual media

-   Strengthen local media

-   Help journalists better understand audiences Fund studies about what youth are interested in consuming beyond pop culture (tech, innovation)

-   Relatively new Kenyan regulation pushing for 40% of content to be locally produced.

-   Support local content production (news series, documentaries, docu-dramas) that focus on Kenyan experience.

-   Commercially competitive local content that has social value

-   Foster distribution partnerships with regional media houses (radio) and/or international media houses.

#### Strengthen Investigative Journalism

-   Travel grants and travel funds for journalists

-   Fellowship/ basket funds to fund story ideas for freelance journalists

## Enabling Environment

#### Network journalists

-   Create/encourage a "solidarity" network of journalists for safety and pushing back on government intimidation; this could also support legally (and advocacy?)

#### Encourage field-wide ethics

-   Create an "Independent Journalist's Code of Conduct" to encourage ethics

-   Fesiable

## Effectiveness


#### Network CSOs and media

-   Encourage networking, collaboration, and trust between CSOs and journalists. (This could include a "colocation" spot where they physically work together -- perhaps as part of the media lab?)

-   Support organizations willing to convene actos around specific topic area; establishing personal networks, focusing on institutionalising these personal networks.

-   Help CSOs becoming more media and digital savvy.

-   Teach orgs how to work with journos i.e.connecting  journalists to human interest stories that explore and surface larger issues rather than want want free advertising)

-   Help journalist learn and grow expertise in specific development issues by exposing them to CSO's and embedding them in organizations.

#### Holistic Approaches to Capacity Building

-   Holistic approach to capacity building is more than training. It involves follow-up and mentoring. It is a bottom-up approach to surface and uncover the gaps that journalists want to know. (more than elections monitoring)

-   Provide training on development issues for journalists and outline roads to specialization.

-   Offer demand-driven trainings for journalists, i.e . Legal trainings, business trainings for freelance journalists

-   Most trainings are concentrated in Nairobi---The local media as the biggest casualty of this lack of robust professional development. Correspondents working for large media houses are under trained. Community radio station workers are completely inexperienced.

-   Provide governance mentorships and training for traditional media correspondents at the local level;

    Help county governments become more versed in media literacy.

-   Help county governments know how to implement the freedom of information act.

#### Experiment with alternative media

-   Create a "media lab" to experiment with alternative and creative storytelling

-   Situated in a university (artists, film makers etc)

# Future Considerations & Conclusion
