### 2. Alternative Media Labs

### Dedicated spaces for experimenting with creative storytelling and novel partnerships would tap into new ways of engaging audiences (and would inspire journalists and media entrepreneurs).

#### Opportunity

In the face of government pressure, journalists need creative ways to capture audience attention with critical narratives. Media supporters could sow the seeds of long-term impact by creating physical and professional spaces for media actors to experiment and prototype new models of storytelling---especially alongside filmmakers, artists, social media experts, technologists, and other cross-disciplinary collaborators. A "media lab," in the model of Nieman Lab or MIT Civic Media Lab, could spark exciting new ventures in Kenya with the potential to fill the independent media vacuum. These incubation spaces could also help to surface promising journalists, storytellers, and other media entrepreneurs.  

#### Impact

Boosting independent media in the context of the continued Kenyatta administration will require bold new models to engage citizen audiences and drive them to action. Creating a space for incubation, safe for new ideas, could nurture the kinds of alternative media companies that would reinvigorate Kenyans' trust in media. In fact, many of the other recommendations presented in this section would benefit from  such a space, where ideas can receive the design and testing they require to fully form.

#### Level of Effort

A lab would benefit from affiliation with a university, although it could also exist independently. Kenya is not new to "hubs" or "labs;" this initiative will need to be well-resourced and well-connected to networks of top talent in order to be taken seriously. A high level of strategic effort will also be required to engage influential change-makers in the lab's programming.
