### 8. Holistic Support at the Local Level

### Providing well-designed trainings---tailored to journalist demand, and outside of Nairobi---can fill urgent capacity gaps.

#### Opportunity

Local-level media has high potential for change at the local level, where a significant amount of important Kenyan power is concentrated. Currently, it also has very low capacity. Training should be tailored to build capacity holistically at the local level. Incorporating incentives into the training program, such as paired grants to enable journalists to apply their new skills, can help create a path to growth beyond the training itself. The important shift here is to ensure trainings are "journalist-centered" (as opposed to "donor-centered"), and are embedded in a larger initiative to ensure trainees have the resources and space to report and publish.

#### Impact

For individual journalists, a truly effective training program can be transformational. While this does not address bigger systemic issues of independence, the initiative would fill a specific capacity gap, and it can help address the serious issue of self-censorship and other journalist-driven media faults.  Importantly, for a training program to have any impact at all, it must be designed---in other words, trainings must be based on a solid foundation of user research, and then created and improved in an iterative process in collaboration with journalists.

#### Level of Effort

While this is not a massive undertaking, an effective training program will require more effort than the standard approach. A one-off training event will be a waste, as many respondents felt previous training programs were. Supporters can benefit from using existing networks to reach journalists at the regional level, develop an understanding of their needs, and build trainings in collaboration with them.
