### 3. New, Independent Publishing Platforms

### Funding emerging alternative publishing platforms run by successful, ethical journalists would help fill the vacuum of trusted media.   

#### Opportunity

Kenya lacks a truly independent media. The "vibrant" Kenyan media ecosystem is completely tied with political strings, as this report has shown. Our research only identified a few nascent experiments in independent media, namely Thika Daily, The Reject, Africa Uncensored, and a few individual bloggers. While these initiatives are an important step in the right direction, Kenya needs independent media organizations that can compete with the establishment organizations and have the credibility to inform public opinion. We believe that supporters should seriously consider finding ways to foster the creation of new, truly independent media platforms that can rebuild trust with audiences and give credible, ethical journalists a viable outlet for their work. This could, and should, take many forms, from identifying and supporting smaller, local or issue specific outlets (such as those listed above), to attempting to build a nationally competitive independent media organization.

Any new platform needs to be driven by the independently minded and courageous journalists and editors who will be tasked with building such an organization. We suggest opening a dialogue among Kenyan leading media practitioners to begin to sketch out what such an organization would look like.

#### Impact

Much more research is required, as well as design, in collaboration with local media actors; our research and experience does suggest that the best media supporter strategy would start small, by supporting multiple, smaller media organizations that have well-defined missions and niche audiences, and grow the most successful experiments over time. By delivering information not found elsewhere, creating competitive pressure for other media houses, and mitigating journalists' risks by offering new places to publish sensitive issues, these independent platforms could offer a dramatic boost to the entire media ecosystem.

#### Level of Effort

Additional scoping, outside of Nairobi, will be needed in order to identify potential existing local outlets for funding and development, but it is likely that a new platform will need to be built from scratch. We recognize this is a very tall task. Supporting platforms will require resources for an extended period of time; competitive wages will be necessary to re-professionalize the journalism field. Outlets will also need strategies and resource to protect their journalists from government intimidation and political threats (especially as the government is likely to attack any successful experiments). Most importantly, this work should build on the vision and effort of existing talented journalists and media actors, avoiding the mistakes of previous donors who have made big bets on startups without sufficient local ownership and design.
