### 1. Designing the Future of Independent Media

### Convening creative, field-leading journalists to brainstorm can shape the foundation of future public interest media in Kenya.

#### Opportunity

For any effort to support independent journalism to be successful, investors must identify the right local partners---and get their ideas and participation. Before any intervention in the Kenyan media landscape, it would be useful to convene journalists and media actors to begin a dialogue on the future of Kenya's independent media.

Such a convening could take place over three to five days in which participants align on the challenges they face, and begin designing feasible solutions. Sessions would be structured to strengthen productive relationships among people who have not previously collaborated. In an effort to encourage creative thinking, participants would be drawn from inside and outside media. Journalists and editors from establishment media, working in all mediums, could participate alongside editors and journalists from independent organizations; correspondents, freelancers, and bloggers should be represented as well. Civil society groups working on media issues would also bring an important perspective; this could include the various professional organizations (e.g. Kenyan Union of Journalists, the Kenyan Correspondents Association), those working on freedom of speech issues (e.g. Article 19, Human Rights Watch, and Internews), and those working on digital access (e.g. Kenya ICT Action Network). It could also include representatives from the various university journalism and/or communications programs throughout the country. From outside media, it could include representatives from civil society working on issues like democracy and governance, and development, as well as digital communications practitioners and other creative storytellers. In addition to finding the right balance between media actors, special attention should also be paid to the gender balance of attendees to ensure that women's voices are represented.

By bringing these groups together, we would hope to strengthen relationships among them, while introducing alternative ways of thinking about and engaging with audiences in an effort to stimulate creative problem solving.

Engaging in open conversations with and amongst media actors in Kenya is vital to identifying and prioritizing workable ideas. It can help ensure future investments are demand-driven, where Kenyan journalists, publishers, and entrepreneurs define the problems, set priorities, design solutions, and make plans to see them into reality. Such an event would also help strengthen a community of practice in Kenya and could catalyze the networks that will be tasked with implementing new ideas. This is a critical first step to any investments in Kenyan media.
