### 14. Solidarity Response Networks

### Institutionalizing a "solidarity" network of journalists can increase safety, amplify calls against government intimidation, and support advocacy and legal efforts.

#### Opportunity

One of the most commonly cited strategies amongst respondents facing government intimidation is solidarity---sharing story tips with other journalists, and calling on other journalists to publicly report on antagonism, has been an effective strategy for some. With enough outrage, the government has backed down in the past. Donors can build on this existing coping strategy by supporting a membership network, a kind of "NATO for journalists," with a formal governance structure and standard operating procedures for responding to government oppression.  

#### Impact

Such an organization could play an important role in mitigating journalists' risks, and could embolden them to push harder and dig deeper in their stories---the psychological benefit of knowing that a community of journalists is ready to back them up could be huge. By guaranteeing a sustained collective response, the organization could also dissuade government attacks. Such an organization would integrate well with other initiatives described in this report, and would amplify those efforts.  

#### Level of Effort

Creating a new organization is a steep order; such work would need to be led by committed Kenyan journalists and fostered through existing networks. It would also require a long-term investment to ensure the organization has the space to build membership and establish a workable governance structure.
