### 11. Connecting Journalists and CSOs

### Institutionalizing networks of trust and collaboration between CSOs and journalists can accelerate and amplify the efforts of each.

#### Opportunity

The vital relationships between media and civil society are weak in Kenya, characterized by mistrust, although a few individuals are able to collaborate due to personal relationships. Institutionalizing these kinds of relationships can encourage more collaboration, and can (and should) take many forms. For example, a series of events designed to connect the two fields and build networks is one strong first step. There may also be opportunities to embed journalists within CSOs to work on specific issue areas, or to establish coworking spaces for shared resources where collaboration may happen more organically.  

#### Impact

This work would increase the impact of both CSOs and journalists. The former would be able to amplify their messages and work, reaching new audiences for advocacy and action, and increasing the pressure they put on government accountability. Journalist support could additionally support CSOs by calling attention to government pressure and threats, opening more civic space. For journalists, CSOs can be highly valuable for contributing expertise and information, as well as connections to human interest stories, and can additionally provide security and political cover.

#### Level of Effort

The mechanics of building trust between these two sectors are relatively straightforward---hosting events and organizing partnerships are relatively familiar territory for donors. However, it is important to note that mistrust between journalists and CSOs is extremely high, so these connections must be created carefully and thoughtfully---and this will require a sustained effort over a long period of time to establish true, trusting relationships.
