## 12. Trust Building Networking or Embedding Journalists in CSO's

### Encourage networking, collaboration, and trust between CSOs and journalists. establishing personal networks, focusing on institutionalising these personal networks.

### Help journalist learn and grow expertise in specific development issues by exposing them to CSO's and embedding them in organizations.

#### Influence

-   A supportive and symbiotic relationship between media and civil society are critical for generating good governance. When relations are good, civil society provides information, expertise, and action. Media gives voices and reach.

-   However, in Kenya, relationship is week. There is general lack of understanding, mistrust,

-   Current collaboration is built around select personal relationships, but it is not as institutionalized

#### Opportunity Description

-   It is important to begin rebuilding relations to build an understanding of the importance of collaboration between civil society and media

-   To do so, there are a number of modalities

-   A series of events aimed at connection

-   Networking to help journalists find the help they need from civili society

-   Emeddign journalists within civil society organizations, or coworking set ups to encourage collaboration

-   Civil society could hold trainings for journalists as a way to meet jorunalists interested in their areas of expertise. We heard about similar initiatives around health

#### Impact

-   This is an important missing pillar and rebuilding could provide an important boost to both civil society and media

#### Level of Effort

-   Mistrust is high, so this will take sustained effort over a long period of time to build these bridges

#### Other Considerations
