### 1. International Learning Networks

### Stronger relationships with international media outlets would provide alternative publishing opportunities, reducing a dependence on Kenyan establishment media, while providing opportunities for professional growth.

#### Opportunity

Most independent journalists working in Kenya depend on establishment media to pay for and publish their work. There is an opportunity for international media companies---including traditional news sources like the BBC and The New York Times to new media companies like HBO, Netflix, NewsDeeply, or Vice---to create fellowships (or similar learning experiences) for talented and ethical Kenyan journalists. These international platforms are known and used by Kenyan elites.

#### Impact

Most immediately, the fellowship would open a space for selected fellows to publish impactful, critical stories that Kenyan media cannot or will not publish.

Over the long term, it would expose journalists to international standards, steeping them in new possibilities beyond pay-to-play coverage and building their capacity in a holistic way. International media would provide political cover for journalists, as well as credibility. While it would reach only a small number of journalists, the program would be transformational for those involved, who may also go on to serve as mentors, entrepreneurs, or other roles with greater reach.

#### Level of Effort

Developing and running a fellowship program would take significant work---building relationships with host media organizations, defining the program, selecting qualified candidates, and more. The program would also require effort from the host media organizations, and thus would need to incentivize their participation.
