### 4. Designing the Future of Independent Media

### Convening creative, field-leading journalists to brainstorm can build the foundation of future problem-solving in Kenya.

#### Opportunity

For any effort to support independent journalism to be successful, implementers must be able to identify the right local media partners to support---and must get their ideas, and buy-in, for the ongoing work. Before any intervention in the Kenyan media landscape, it would be useful to convene journalists and media actors to begin a dialogue on the future of Kenya's independent media.

#### Impact

Engaging in equitable, open conversations with and amongst media actors in Kenya is vital to identifying and prioritizing workable ideas. Such an event would help strengthen a community of practice in Kenya, identify leaders, and could catalyze the networks that will be tasked with implementing new ideas. This is a critical first step to any investments in Kenyan media, in any thematic area.

#### Level of Effort

While hosting a convening requires fewer resources than other recommendations in this thematic area, it is important not to underinvest in such an event. Providing a safe and generative space for a convening requires thoughtful design, facilitation, and planning, including research and consultation with key experts and potential participants long before the event itself. Additionally, success requires engagement long after the event itself---as following up and coordinating with participants will be vital to following through on the energy and ideas generated during the convening.
