### 5. Public Interest Storytelling  

### Funding commercially driven content that is grounded in social impact---such as news series, documentaries, docu-dramas, comedy, and satire---can meet consumer demand while informing and empowering audiences.

#### Opportunity

Much of Kenyan entertainment media has historically been shipped in from international audiences. However, a[ new law now requires 40 percent of content](https://www.standardmedia.co.ke/article/2000187819/kenyan-broadcasters-have-till-june-to-comply-with-law-on-local-content-law) to be produced locally, which is creating incentives for media outlets that supporters can take advantage of by backing independent journalists to create new forms of public interest content in new mediums. Stories that emotionally cover the nuances of the Kenyan experience (rather than more straightforward news about corruption), and/or that embed meaningful information in entertainment, can tap into new streams of audience demand.

Further, while the government is very good at targeting traditional media, there is potential for alternative styles of distributing information to fly under the radar for longer, building up a trusting audience and revenue to defend against attack (although the [firing of cartoonist Gado](https://cpj.org/blog/2016/03/gado-blames-government-pressure-as-cartoonists-con.php) shows that no medium is impervious).

#### Impact

Successful public interest content in the entertainment media model can provide new business and career opportunities for talented journalists. A well-produced and well-received piece could be a game changer, if it demonstrates the business viability of such content (although there will be many pieces that reach only small audiences). The intended audience of any piece of content (international versus national versus local) will greatly affect the potential impact.

#### Level of Effort

This could be prototyped and tested easily, with the right partnerships and financial support for promising ideas. The program could increase in size and complexity exponentially, depending on number of collaborative organizations and the media in which stories are produced. Perhaps the greatest task will be bridging the gap between traditional journalists and other types of storytellers. Nevertheless, Kenya already has examples to learn from, such as political satire in the form of the television show XYZ; another example is Well Told Story, which is engaging young adults in social issues through comic books.
